interfaces all comply with the PCI specification.

Refer to the PCI Specification for more details. A list of all the
applicable specifications is in the References section.

It is interesting to note that in the UEFI system, the DXE phase does not
execute the majority of drivers, but it is the BDS Phase that executes most of

the required drives in UEFI to allow the system to boot.

Graphics Initialization

If the platform has a head, then the video BIOS or Graphics Output Protocol
UEFI driver is normally the first option ROM to be executed in the string.
Once the main console out is up and running, the console in can be

configured.

Input Devices

Refer to the board schematics to determine which I/O devices are in the
system. Typically, a system will contain one or more of the following

devices.

Embedded Controller (EC)

An embedded controller is typically used in mobile or low-power systems.
The EC contains separate firmware that controls the power management
functions for the system, as well as PS/2 keyboard functionality. Refer to the

specific EC datasheet for more details.

Super 1/0 (SIO)
Interfaces all comply with the P C I specification. Refer to the P C I Specification for more details. A list of all the applicable specifications is in the References section. It is interesting to note that in the U E F I system, the D X E phase does not execute the majority of drivers, but it is the B D S Phase that executes most of the required drives in U E F I to allow the system to boot.

Graphics Initialization

If the platform has a head, then the video B I O S or Graphics Output Protocol U E F I driver is normally the first option R O M to be executed in the string. Once the main console out is up and running, the console in can be configured.

Input Devices

Refer to the board schematics to determine which I O devices are in the system. Typically, a system will contain one or more of the following devices.

Embedded Controller (EC)

An embedded controller is typically used in mobile or low power systems. The E C contains separate firmware that controls the power management functions for the system, as well as P S slash two keyboard functionality. Refer to the specific E C datasheet for more details.

Super I O (SIO)
The content discusses system initialization and input device handling within a computer architecture context. The initial paragraph references compliance with the P C I specification, implying the use of the Peripheral Component Interconnect standard for system bus communication. It further points to a "References section" for detailed specifications. The text highlights an interesting aspect of the U E F I system, specifically the DXE phase's role in executing most of the required drivers to enable system boot.

Following this, the section on "Graphics Initialization" explains the process of bringing graphics hardware online. It states that if a platform has a graphics card, the video B I O S or Graphics Output Protocol U E F I driver is typically the first option R O M to be executed. This sequence culminates in the main console becoming operational and configured.

The "Input Devices" section directs the reader to consult board schematics to identify the specific I O devices present in a system. It notes that a typical system will feature one or more input devices.

The "Embedded Controller (EC)" subsection defines the Embedded Controller as a component commonly found in mobile or low power systems. This controller is described as containing separate firmware responsible for system functions, including PS/2 keyboard functionality. For further details, reference to the specific E C datasheet is recommended.

Finally, the mention of "Super I O (SIO)" suggests another integrated circuit, often found on motherboards, which consolidates various legacy I O functions like serial ports, parallel ports, and floppy disk controllers. While not elaborated upon, its presence indicates a layer of peripheral management.
