echo 1 — START”

GOTO labell

echo “1 - NO”

FOR %a IN a b ¢ echo “1 - NO”
: labell

echo “1 - NO”

ENDFOR

echo “1 - END”

This script is a simple functional test of the goto script-only command. The
significant limitation of script files are that they cannot do anything that is not
already done in either a shell command or an existing shell application. This
means that script files are good for repetitive tasks, but they have their
limitations. For example, to output the current memory information to a log
file and then compare that with a known good version of the file is an
excellent task for completion by a script file. On the other hand, opening a
network connection and sending some information to a remote platform is
something that is not already encapsulated into a shell command (and
assuming there is no special application) means that this would be better done
with an application and not a script.

The power behind applications is that they can open and interact with
any protocol and any handle that is present in the system. An application has
all of the same privileges and rights as a UEFI driver—this means that the

application can do pretty much anything. A script, on the other hand, cannot
Echo one minus start. Go to label one. Echo one minus no. For percent sign A in A B C echo one minus no. Colon label one. Echo one minus no. End for. Echo one minus end. This script is a simple functional test of the GoTo script only command. The significant limitation of script files is that they cannot do anything that is not already done in either a shell command or an existing shell application. This means that script files are good for repetitive tasks, but they have their limitations. For example, to output the current memory information to a log file and then compare that with a known good version of the file is an excellent task for completion by a script file. On the other hand, opening a network connection and sending some information to a remote platform is something that is not already encapsulated into a shell command, and assuming there is no special application, means that this would be better done with an application and not a script. The power behind applications is that they can open and interact with any protocol and any handle that is present in the system. An application has all of the same privileges and rights as a U E F I driver. This means that the application can do pretty much anything. A script, on the other hand, cannot
The provided code snippet demonstrates a basic shell script illustrating control flow mechanisms, specifically the use of a `GOTO` statement and a `FOR` loop with a label. The script begins with `echo "1 - START"`, which is a command to print the string "1 - START" to the standard output. Following this, `GOTO label1` signifies an unconditional jump to the line marked by the label `:label1`. Before the jump, `echo "1 - NO"` is executed.

The loop structure is defined by `FOR %a IN a b c echo "1 - NO"`. This construct iterates over the elements "a", "b", and "c". For each iteration, the command `echo "1 - NO"` is executed. However, the presence of the `GOTO label1` within the loop's scope, specifically after the `FOR` statement and before the loop's body, implies a potentially complex or unintended execution path depending on the shell's interpretation of `GOTO` relative to loop constructs. In many scripting environments, `GOTO` is discouraged due to its potential to create spaghetti code and hinder readability and maintainability. Labels, like `:label1`, are markers that `GOTO` statements can target.

The script's execution would proceed as follows: print "1 - START", then print "1 - NO", then jump to `:label1`. At `:label1`, the command `echo "1 - NO"` is executed again. The `ENDFor` statement marks the termination of the loop, which, in this specific code, is never actually entered because the `GOTO` statement diverts execution before the loop's body can be reached and before the `FOR` statement itself is fully processed as a control flow instruction that dictates iteration. Finally, `echo "1 - END"` would be printed after the `ENDFor` block. The loop construct `FOR %a IN a b c` seems to be syntactically incomplete or unusual in standard shell scripting, suggesting it might be specific to a particular shell dialect or intended as illustrative of a control flow concept.

The accompanying text discusses the utility and limitations of script files. Script files are presented as effective for repetitive tasks, such as outputting current memory information to a log file. The example of comparing a current file with a known good version, or handling network connections and remote data transfer, highlights the ability of scripts to automate complex sequences of operations. However, a significant limitation is identified: script files cannot perform actions not already encapsulated within a shell command or an existing shell application. This contrasts with applications, which are described as having the power to interact with any protocol and handle system resources with privileges and rights akin to a UEFI driver. Applications can thus perform virtually any operation. A script, by contrast, operates within the constraints of the underlying shell environment and the commands it can invoke. The text implies that for operations requiring deeper system access or specialized communication protocols, a compiled application is generally necessary, whereas scripts excel at orchestrating existing tools and commands.
