The process of initializing Application Processors, or A Ps, in a multiprocessor system is intricate and involves several key steps. According to the Intel six four and I A thirty two Architectures Software Developer's Manual, Volume three A, the typical A P initialization sequence is outlined, illustrating what is typically done by the A Ps after receiving the System Management Interrupt, referred to as S I P I. This sequence is crucial for ensuring that all processors in the system are properly initialized and ready for operation.Caching considerations are also vital in multiprocessor systems, as different processor combinations and attributes of shared processing registers between threads necessitate careful attention to cache layout. The goal is to ensure that the caching arrangement across all processors remains consistent, thus avoiding caching conflicts. The Intel six four and I A thirty two Architectures Software Developer's Manual, Volume three A, section "M T R R Considerations in M P Systems," outlines a safe mechanism for changing the cache configuration in all systems that contain more than one processor. It is recommended that this be used for any system with more than one processor present.The behavior of A Ps during firmware initialization depends on the firmware implementation but is most commonly restricted to short durations of initialization, followed by entering a halt state with a H L T instruction, awaiting direction from the Bootstrap Processor, or B S P, for another operation. Once the firmware is ready to attempt to boot an Operating System, or O S, all A P processors must be placed back in their power-on state, which can be accomplished by the B S P sending an I N I T A S S E R T I P I followed by an I N I T D E A S S E R T I P I to all A Ps in the system, except itself.Following the early initialization phase, the advanced device initialization stage ensures that the dynamic random access memory, or D Ram, is functional. This stage is further segmented into device-specific initializations, including the setup of General Purpose Input Output, or G P I O, controllers, interrupt controllers, timers, cache initialization, serial ports, console input/output mechanisms, clocking and overclocking configurations, Peripheral Component Interconnect, or P C I, bus initialization, graphics initialization, Universal Serial Bus, or U S B, and Serial Advanced Technology Attachment, or S A T A, interfaces. These initializations are crucial for preparing various peripheral devices to enable an embedded system's operation.G P I Os are key to the extensibility of the platform, as they can be configured for either input or output, as well as for native functionality. Depending on weak or strong pull-up or pull-down resistors, some G P I Os can also act like strapping pins, which are sampled at R E S E T by the chipset and can have a second meaning during boot and runtime. System-on-chip devices are designed to be used in a large number of configurations, and the configuration of the pins must be set before use. G P I O control registers provide status and control, and system firmware developers must work through between sixty-four and two hundred fifty-six G P I Os and their individual options with the board designer per platform to ensure that this feature is properly enabled.Intel architecture has several different methods of interrupt handling, including the Programmable Interrupt Controller, or P I C, and the Local Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller, or A P I C. These interrupt controllers are essential for managing hardware interrupt requests and ensuring efficient handling of asynchronous events from peripherals. By understanding and properly configuring these components, system developers can create efficient and reliable multiprocessor systems that meet the demands of modern computing applications.
