The startup sequence of a computing platform commences with the application of external power. The hardware, including the processor, cannot perform any operations until it is brought out of a reset state. The initial critical task is to allow the power supply circuitry to stabilize and reach its nominal voltage levels. This process involves the primary power supply, which then often feeds into secondary regulators to generate the specific voltage rails required by various components. For example, on an Intel architecture platform, the input power supply might be a twelve volt source, but the processor and other components necessitate a range of derived voltage rails, such as one point five volt, three point three volt, five volt, and twelve volt.This generation of multiple voltage rails is a carefully controlled process known as power sequencing. Power sequencing ensures that voltages are applied in a specific order, preventing damage to sensitive components and allowing the system to initialize correctly. This sequencing is frequently orchestrated by a complex logic device, such as a complex programmable logic device, or C P L D, which often incorporates field effect transistors. The C P L D's operation is typically driven by derived clocks, which are themselves generated from a small number of input clock and oscillator sources. The C P L D utilizes phase locked loop circuitry to produce these necessary derived clocks. These derived clocks also require time to stabilize or converge to their target frequencies. Once all these prerequisite steps, including the stabilization of voltage rails and clock convergence, are complete, the C P L D typically de-asserts a reset line, signaling to the processor and other components that they can begin their initialization procedures.The power sequencing process is critical to the proper initialization of the system. A diagram illustrating this process would show the key components involved, including the power regulation block, field effect transistors, and the power sequencing and control block. The power regulation block generates the various voltage rails required by the system, while the field effect transistors act as controlled switches, enabling or disabling power to different parts of the system based on the sequencing logic. The power sequencing and control block determines the order and timing of power delivery, ensuring that components receive power at the correct time and preventing damage.In addition to the power sequencing process, other subsystems within the system may commence their operational sequence prior to the main host system initiating its primary boot process. For example, the Intel Manageability Engine, or M E, available on some mainstream, desktop, and server-derived chips, is one such component. While the main system firmware does not initialize these devices directly, the M E manages the initialization sequence, interacting with the flash component of the system to start up and enable the clocks correctly. The main system firmware can also be called by the M E, indicating a layered approach to system control.Another example of a subsystem that may start independently of the host system's Basic Input Output System, or B I O S, is the microengines. These microengines possess their own firmware that initializes independently of the host system's B I O S. The host B I O S must provide mechanisms, such as those defined by the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface, or A C P I, memory map, to facilitate interaction between host drivers and these microengine subsystems, ensuring interoperability and correct system operation.Once the processor reset line has been de-asserted, the processor begins fetching instructions from a location known as the reset vector. The reset vector may contain instructions or a pointer to the actual starting instruction sequence in the flash memory. The location of the vector is architecture-specific and usually in a fixed location, depending on the processor. For Intel architecture, the first fetching instructions start from hexadecimal F F F F, F F F F zero. Only sixteen bytes are left to the top of memory, so these sixteen bytes must contain a far jump to the remainder of the initialization code. This code is always written in assembly at this point, as there is no software stack or cache-as-RAM available.Because the processor cache is not enabled by default, it is not uncommon to flush cache in this step with a W B I N V instruction. The W B I N V instruction is not needed on newer processors, but it doesn't hurt anything. After the initial instructions are fetched, the processor may automatically load a microcode update as part of its secure startup sequence. Any correctable errata will be fixed before any executable code kicks off, ensuring the security of the system.The Intel architecture supports three operating modes and one quasi-operating mode. Protected mode is considered the native operating mode of the processor, providing a rich set of architectural features and flexibility. The mode selection process is critical to the proper operation of the system, and the choice of mode depends on the specific requirements of the application. Understanding the power sequencing process, the role of subsystems, and the mode selection process is essential for designing and developing complex electronic systems.
