The Serial Presence Detect, or S P D, data stored on memory modules serves as a vital interface for system firmware to identify and configure memory components. This data is structured in a specific format, with individual bits and bytes conveying critical information. Bit seven, for instance, indicates the C R C, or Cyclic Redundancy Check, coverage, where a value of zero signifies that the C R C covers bytes zero through one hundred twenty-five, and a value of one indicates coverage of bytes zero through one hundred sixteen. This bit is crucial for ensuring data integrity during transmission and read operations.Bits six through four are allocated to the total S P D byte count, specifying the overall size of the serial presence detect data. For example, a binary value of zero zero zero indicates an undefined total byte count, whereas binary zero zero one signifies two hundred fifty-six bytes. The lower three bits, bits three through zero, are designated for the S P D bytes used, indicating the number of bytes actively employed within the S P D data structure. Specific values such as binary zero zero zero zero indicate an undefined state, while binary zero zero zero one denotes one hundred twenty-eight bytes used.The S P D Field zero x zero one is specifically designated for the S P D Revision, with down-on-board memory designs recommended to use zero x one zero for this field. The table detailing this field shows that Byte one, represented in hexadecimal as zero x zero one, corresponds to the S P D Rev field, with a typical value of zero x one zero, and is defined as Revision one point zero. This suggests a versioning mechanism for the S P D data format itself, allowing systems to understand compatibility based on the revision number.Byte one, S P D Revision, describes the compatibility level of the encoding of bytes contained within the S P D E E P R O M. Software should examine the upper nibble, Encoding Level, to determine if it can correctly interpret the contents of the module S P D. The lower nibble, Additions Level, can optionally be used to determine which additional bytes or attribute bits have been defined. However, since any undefined additional byte must be encoded as zero or an undefined attribute bit must be defined as zero, software can safely detect additional bytes and use safe defaults if a zero encoding is read for these bytes.The Additions Level is never reduced even after an increment of the Encoding Level. For example, if the current S P D revision level were one point two and a change in Encoding Level were approved, the next revision level would be two point two. If additions to revision two point two were approved, the next revision would be two point three. Changes in the Encoding Level are extremely rare, however, since they can create incompatibilities with older systems. The exceptions to the above rule are the S P D revision levels used during development prior to the Revision one point zero release.The S P D Field zero x zero two is designated for the Device Type, with D D R three D I M M s programmed with the value zero x zero B. This byte is the key byte used by the system B I O S to determine how to interpret all other bytes in the S P D E E P R O M. The B I O S must check this byte first to ensure that the E E P R O M data is interpreted correctly. Any D Ram or module type that requires significant changes to the S P D format also requires a new entry in the key byte table. This key byte plays a crucial role in ensuring that the system can correctly configure and utilize the memory modules based on their specific characteristics and capabilities.
